World War I (28 July 1914 – 11 November 1918), often abbreviated as WWI, also known as the Great War, was one of the deadliest global conflicts in history. It was fought between two coalitions, the first being the Allies, whose key members included France, Britain, Russia, Italy, Japan and their respective colonial empires, with the United States joining as an associated power in 1917. They faced the Central Powers, primarily Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire, with fighting occurring throughout Europe, the Middle East, Africa, the Pacific, and parts of Asia. An estimated 9 million soldiers were killed in combat, plus another 23 million wounded, while 5 million civilians died as a result of military action, hunger, and disease. Millions more died in genocides within the Ottoman Empire and in the 1918 influenza pandemic, which was exacerbated by the movement of combatants during the war.

The first decade of the 20th century was a period of increasing diplomatic tension between the European great powers. This came to a head on 28 June 1914, when a Bosnian Serb named Gavrilo Princip carried out the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, the Austro-Hungarian heir. Austria-Hungary held Serbia responsible, and despite diplomatic efforts to resolve the conflict, declared war on 28 July. Serbia's ally Russia came to its defence, and by the 4th of August, over-lapping defensive alliances had also drawn in France, Britain and Germany. The Ottoman Empire entered the war on the side of the Central Powers in November 1914, with Italy joining the Allies in April 1915.

German strategy in 1914 was to first defeat France, then shift its troops to the east and do the same to Russia. However, this failed, and by the end of 1914, the Western Front consisted of a continuous line of trenches stretching from the English Channel to Switzerland. Although the Eastern Front was more fluid, over the next three years the overall situation in these areas changed little, despite a series of costly offensives. Attempts to bypass this stalemate meant fighting expanded into the Middle East, Italy, Asia Pacific, and the Balkans, bringing Bulgaria, Romania, and Greece into the war.

By early 1917, Russia was on the verge of revolution, while all belligerents were increasingly short of manpower and under severe economic stress. In April, the United States entered the war on the side of the Allies, although the Bolsheviks seized power in the 1917 October Revolution, and Russia made peace in March 1918. This released large numbers of German troops from the Eastern Front, who were used to launch the German spring offensive in the West. Initial gains were halted by stubborn defence, heavy casualties, and supply shortages, while the Imperial German Army was exhausted by its efforts. As a result, when the Allies took the offensive in August, they could only slow the advance, not stop it.

Between 29 September and 3 November, Bulgaria, the Ottoman Empire and Austria-Hungary agreed armistices with the Allies, leaving Germany isolated. Facing revolution at home, and with his army on the verge of mutiny, Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicated on 9 November. The Armistice of 11 November 1918 brought the fighting to a close, while the Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920) imposed various settlements on the defeated powers, the best-known being the Treaty of Versailles. The dissolution of the Russian, German, Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires resulted in the creation of new independent states, among them Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia. For reasons still debated, failure to manage the instability that resulted from this upheaval during the interwar period contributed to the outbreak of World War II in September 1939. 